Introduction to Linux and UNIX
History of UNIX & LINUX
Basic Concepts of Operating Systems, Kernel, shell and file system structure
 Installation of Linux
Different types of Installation Methods
GUI
Text
 Linux System Structure
Basic concepts of Linux
Differences between Red Hat Enterprise Linux & CentOS
Basic bash commands of Linux
Editors [GUI & CLI]
Boot Process of Linux
What is booting and boot process of Linux?
Init Process or Runlevels
Software Package Administration
Description of a Repository
Difference between RPM and YUM
Configuration of YUM server
Installing and deleting software packages
Querying and updating software packages
User and Group Administration
Types of Users in Linux
Creating and deleting Users and Groups
Modifying Users profile
Adding Users into the Groups
Important system files related to User & Group administration
Advanced File Permissions
Importance of Permissions
Types of Permissions
User level Permissions
Group level Permissions
Setting Access Level Permissions on Users & Groups
 Disk Partitioning and Mounting File System
Definition of Partition
Types of Partitions
Difference between ext2, ext3 and ext4 file systems
Creating partitions using fdisk utility
Formatting partitions using mkfs to create filesystems
Mounting various filesystems temporarily and permanently
Logical Volume Management
What is LVM?
Conversion of Partition into Physical Volume
Creating volume groups and logical volumes
Mounting the logical volume filesystems
Extend and Reduce the logical volumes.
Data storage using LVM
Renaming volume groups and logical volumes
Removing physical volume, volume group and logical volume
Backup and Recovery
Introduction to various types of backup media
Backup and restoring using tar commands
Automation of Jobs
NFS
Configuring NFS server
Mounting NFS exports on clients
 NIS
Basics of NIS
Configuring NIS Servers and client
Creating NIS users
DNS
Basics of Internet
Basics of DNS and BIND 9
Configuring DNS primary server
DHCP
Configuring Linux as DHCP Server
Configuring various clients for DHCP Server
Web Server (Apache)
Basics of Web Service
Introduction to Apache
Configuring Apache for main site
Configuring Apache for multiple sites using IP-based, port based and name-based
FTP Server
Basics of File Transfer Protocol.
Configuring vsftpd for anonymous ftp service.
Proxy Server (SQUID)
Basics of proxy services
Configuring proxy services
Creating ACL’s for controlling access to internet
 Samba Server
Basics of file sharing in Windows
Configuring Samba service for file sharing with windows systems
Mail Server Configuration
Basics of Mail Servers
Configuring SMTP service using sendmail
 Log Server
Importance of logs
Configuring Syslog Messages
 Network Connections
Configuring Physical IP Address
Configuring Virtual IP Address
Enabling & Disabling the Network Connections
Iptables
 Basics of Shell scripting
 Troubleshooting Linux
Recovering the super user password.
Troubleshooting network related problems.
MONITORING PROJECTS
PROJECT 1: OVERSEAS using NAGIOS
Knowledge Transfer:
Definition of Monitoring, Benefits and types of Monitoring tool
Process based concepts on Threshold value, Alerts, Priority levels and Escalation Format
Roles of Linux Engineer:
Worked as a Linux Engineer in 24/7 team responsible to maintain servers and provide FCR at any point of time.
Monitoring/Troubleshooting the following alerts/issues.
CPU
Load Average
Memory Usage
Network Issues
Disk Space issues
Service Status
Website Blips
Perform the TRIAGE with regards to the alerts by following SOP and find the RCA.
Escalating the alerts to level-2 team incase unable to provide resolution.
Creating a production ticket for each and every alert.
Open trouble tickets with the 3rd party service provider for any network outages, site blips, database issues & Disk failed issues.